Clementine Observations of the Zodiacal Light and the Dust Content
of the Inner Solar System

by Joe Hahn, LPI

Using the Moon to occult the Sun, the Clementine spacecraft used
its navigation cameras to map the inner zodiacal light at optical
wavelengths over elongations of 3-30 degrees from the Sun. The
zodiacal light is sunlight that is reflected by interplanetary
dust, so these images provide information on the spatial
distribution of this dust over heliocentric distances of
about 10 solar radii to the orbit of Venus. A simple model is
applied to the data where it is assumed that the zodiacal light is
due to three dust populations having distinct inclination
distributions. These populations are: low-inclination dust from
asteroids and Jupiter-family comets, higher-inclination dust from
Halley-type comets, and an isotropic cloud of dust from Oort Cloud
comets and interstellar sources. This modeling then yields
estimates of the relative contributions to the interplanetary dust
cross-section from asteroids, comets, and interstellar dust
sources, as measured in the ecliptic as well as at higher
latitudes. These results for the inner solar system are
extrapolated out to the asteroid belt and yield an upper limit on
the mass of the light-reflecting asteroidal dust that is equivalent
to a 10 km asteroid. A similar extrapolation of the isotropic dust
cloud out to Oort Cloud distances yields a mass equivalent to a
30 km comet (although this mass estimate is quite uncertain). Since
the flow of interstellar gas and dust ultimately strips these
wide-ranging Oort Cloud dust grains from the solar system, these
finding suggests that the Sun and perhaps other stars may have vast
but tenuous stellar dust tails.
